02/02/2023
Inez Derkx


Alcohol variables:
- Drink today (binary)
- Drink yesterday (binary)
- How many drinks per day (character)
- Blood alcohol content (numeric)

Computed alcohol variables:
- Drinker (binary)
- Alcohol frequency (categorical)

Variable drinker includes 158 individuals. For dead individuals, those whose cause of death mentioned 'alcohol' are treated as drinkers and 
all other deaths are treated as non-drinkers (the "conservative" approach). For alive individuals, all those whose answer to any of the alcohol variables 
is not positive (yes/a number of drinks per day/BAC). 

Variable alcohol frequency is a categorized version of 'how many drinks per day' and includes 113 individuals, all who are currently alive. For dead
individuals, the information is not available. The levels of the variable include: 0, 'one or less', 'two or less', 'three or less', 'four or less', and
'more than four', a.k.a. 0, <1, 1-2, 2-3, 3-4, 4+. Despite the naming of the levels, they are not cumulative. 

A Basta was performed using both these variables as covariates separately. The basta model with alcohol frequency as covariate did not converge,
likely because it does not include any individuals who have died as the model does not accept NAs in its covariates. 

The basta model with drinker as covariate converges and gives drinkers a lower life estimate than non-drinkers by about 15 years. Drinkers' survival curve
is also shaped differently and falls more quickly than the non-drinkers curve. Lastly, drinkers seemt o have less variation compared to non-drinkers in
age-specific survival and mortality. 

NOTE: these two models have both been ran with the model in which all dead people who died between 2015-2017 are assumed to have died in 2015, because
using this dataset in thre previous model led to convergence. 

NOTE: some individuals are born and die in the same year. Due to the model, they have to be changed. As such, their death year is extended with + 1 and
as a result they then have 1 data point. For example, I am born in 2020 February and die in November. In the dataset, I am born in November and captured
in 2021. So I will have 1 data point in 2021. This is because basta does not accept recaptures in the same year as the birth year. 
----



03/02/2023 - update
Inez Derkx

I updated the model with alcohol frequency. Firstly, I performed another permutation test to create a new sample with randomly distributed death years 
for all 14 individuals who died between 2014 and 2018. Using this sample I re-performed the model, again with only individuals alive as only those gave
the necessary information. This model included 113 individuals and a covariate with 6 levels as before. The model converged and accurately shows a higher
probability of survival for individuals who drink less and a higher mortality for those who drink more. The y-axis for the mortality curve goes up to 3 -
what does this mean? The x-axis for both also goes up to 150 years. Is this because there is not enough death data?

Mean/max/min birth years for the categories:
0 per day: 1999 / 2018 / 1931
One or less: 2001 / 2017 / 1955
Two or less: 1999 / 2017 / 1959
Three or less: 1982 / 2009 / 1940
Four or less: 1982 / 2006 / 1959
More than four: 1984 / 1999 / 1960

So, there is somewhat of an age-specific effect > you can split the categories in 2 >  Two or less are all younger on average & more than two are older. 
Is this what is creating the curve? The fact that younger individuals are drinking less?
----



07/02/2023 - update

Model to examine parents' drinking behaviour as covariate will not work well for the following reasons:
- None of the children under 15 have parents who dont drink, apart from 1 individual who is dead (and classified as 'non-drinker' because he did not die
of alcohol) and 1 individual who is alive and who has been observed drinking (but by us, so not a valid data point). 
- All covariates being equal wont lead to a good model 
- Drinking behaviour by parents in frequency will be skewed as not all individuals have two known parents. 
- How to construct a potential composite measure? > sum of both parents' drinking frequency?
- Composite measure based on frequency only gives info for parents who are alive both > will give a biased and smaller sample

So, how can we look at parents' drinking frequency as an influential factor for childrens drinking?

Chisquare test of independence? 
Since we have two categorical variables (child alive/not alive & drinking frequency in cats), we can perform the
chi2 test. However, when looking closer at the data we have a few missing values. These inhibit us from actually performing the test, since "If x is a 
matrix with at least two rows and columns, it is taken as a two-dimensional contingency table: the entries of x must be non-negative integers. 
Otherwise, x and y must be vectors or factors of the same length; cases with missing values are removed, the objects are coerced to factors, and the 
contingency table is computed from these." >>> So, with missing values not possible. However, deleting them will also delete important info, can't do that.

Regression analysis?
Again, the issue of missing values > trade-off: less data to include or no analysis?


10/02/23 - update

BaSTA performed with drinker/no drinker, where all kids who died from cold are coded as drinker. This leads to a near 50 percent chance of dying in 
the first year of birth for drinkers, compared to more or less 35 for non-drinkers.
Clear differences shown when looking at life expectancy. There's about a general ten year difference between the two groups in the beginning, which goes
down to about 7, and slowly increases to around 10 again.




13/02/23 - update

Notes after Thursday's presentation:
- Look at influence of parents’ drinking separately:
    - Mother > potentially due to breastfeeding
    - Father > no necessary expected effects
- Use age-specific fertility and check with effect of
    - Mother drinking y/n
    - Father drinking y/n
- Reproductive life of woman check kids by age and see if drinking yes/no has an effect
- Check inclusive drinking behaviour of dead individuals (code is done, run basta only)

Performed:
Only mothers' drinking behaviour (composite measure)
- Includes 30 individuals, 24 alive and 6 dead, 13 female and 17 male. 
- Of kids alive, most moms belong to category 2 (equals two or less), then cat. 3 and 1. 
- Of kids dead, no mom drinks 1. 5 moms drink 2 and 1 mom drinks 3. 


Only fathers' drinking behaviour (composite measure
- Includes 55 individuals, 46 alive and 9 dead, 27 females and 28 males. 
- Of kids alive, most fathers drink 3 drinks, then 5, 1, 2, 4. 
- Of kids dead, most fathers drink 5 drinks, then 3 and 2. 

Basta figures show no direct linear progression in mortality and survival curve and drinking behaviour by either the mother or the father. 
Histograms of the birthyears of the two samples used show a similar meanmedian birth year (2015+-,2015) and the same min/max birth years (2007/2021). 
Both are slightly skewed, with more individuals being born later


Age-specific fertility

So we want to find out whether drinking behaviour of men and drinking behaviour of women is in someway related to fertility. In order to know this, 
we have to compute age-specific fertility > so that the effect we are seeing is not older > more children + older > more drinking = more children = more
drinking. 

How to go about this:
- Nr of alive children per individual


14/02/23 - update

Contacted Colchero about the "CalcFert" option in the package. Other option would be to look at "own children method" to have an idea of how the nr. of
children of an individual interacts with drinking without having age as a confounder. 

The linear regressions conducted for males and females separately so far show an effect of age for males but not for females on the nr. of children who
are alive, but no effect of drinking (yes/no) for either. The sample includes all individuals above 20, rather than all individuals who have children. 
This is the cutoff point because the earliest age of reproduction listed is 23, but we know of individuals who are younger and have had children who
died. So it is definitely younger than 23.

The person who passed away is Narayen, due to burn wounds (40%) on his body. Pictures are in Sudarshan's email. His status and details still have to be
changed in the dataset, this should be done tomorrow. 



16/02/23 - update

Important to come back to the beginning: what BASIC INFORMATION do I want to know?
> blood alcohol content: 17 individuals who werent sober. 8 of those were drunk (out of a sample of 36) a few days before a festival...
> How often do individuals drink? Most people drink at least 1 glass per day (64%), 37% of sample consumed more than two glasses per day. 14% more than three
glasses per day. 
> Why do people drink?

What would we expect (if data were perfect representation of reality)?
> Individuals who drink live shorter than individuals who don't drink
> Individuals who drink more live shorter than individuals who drink less
> Individuals who drink (more) have less children than individuals who don't (or drink less)
> Individuals who drink (more) experience higher rates of child mortality than individuals who don't (or drink less)

ASFR > need to know, per year between 2018 and 2022, which age category women belonged to and how many babies were born that year per age_category. 


20/02/23 - update

Choosing plots/results for the paper

Descriptives:
- Who drinks? Drinking yes/no by sex
- How often do they drink? Drinking frequency per day
- Why do they drink? Drinking rationales
- Was it measured? Blood alcohol content (explain no correlations sex/age)

Mortality and survival explained:
- Sex basta
- Alcohol (binary) basta

> Cannot for some reason combine the basta plot into a grid, ask if Lucio remembers having the same issue.


21/02/23 - update

- Looking at child mortality and parents' drinking > does not yield great results, because only has young kids in it... Should we include the whole 
sample and then look at parents' drinking behaviour and plot only those under 15?

Notes from meeting with Lucio:
X Drinking behaviour: histogram of yes/no drinking by age (potentially divide children vs. adults)
X Wilcoxon test for sex & alcohol frequency (with multiple levels)
X Proportion test for sex & drinker (perhaps separately for those alive and for the whole sample)
X Basta without any covariates, calculate life expectancy (at birth, at 15, at 50)
X Check life expectancy for males/females separately at birth, 15, and 50
X For Basta with drinking (0/1): children (alive) under 3 should be coded as non-drinker (REMEMBER THIS ASSUMPTION!!)
X For papers' potential supplementary material, add the inclusive drinker basta as well
X MAKE SURE TO KNOW WHO ARE THE NON-DRINKERS AND WHY THEN THAT THERE ARE NO PARENT DRINKERS APART FROM DEAD ONES > CHECK the SI paper
X Is there an effect of sex in the basta on drinker yes/no? > check by making 4 levels (M-1, M-0, F-1, F-0) > do we see a major difference between F & M?
X Parents' drinking behaviour: divide > below three & three and above (< 3 & >= 3) for 'light' vs. 'heavy' drinking
X Can we get the points of the mortality curve or does the calc mort function help in this potentially?
X Perfrom a Poisson GLM



27/02/23

Performing Poisson GLMs
The Poisson GLM seems a better fit than the other models, given the distribution of the dependent variable. THere is some effect of drinking on male
children alive, but not on females' children alive. This is for individuals above 20, some of which dont have children. Is it possible that not having
children here is impacting the relationship between alcohol/kids? Even if age is also included and already contributes to a great deal of variance?
Perhaps we can add being married as a control? 

Go back to the main question: does alcohol use have an influence on fertility? Why would it be different for males than for females?

> There are a couple of people who said, in response to frequency Q, that they don't drink, but they have indicated otherwise that they do drink. What
to do in this case?
> Non-drinkers in raute_fert_drink$alcohol_freq accidentally coded as "light" > make sure to change in analyses! CHECKED, its okay

> Probably the non-drinkers have higher initial life expectancy in the graph that includes children under 3 coded as drinking = 0, because you have a lot
of young kids who are dying and who are classified as non-drinking, whilst you don't have any younger kids who die of drinking. So the initial graph, 
even the one that splits drinkers and non-drinkers, under the age of 5 is more so a joint trend of mortality and not necessarily accurate of the pattern
that we observe for drinking vs. non-drinking. 


01/03/23

To do today:
- Examine the use of Bayesian modelling to look at fertility x alcohol 
- Examine other ways in which we can look at this relationship > e.g. from the death register
        - Perhaps the part about fertility and child mortality should be joined > your children dying equals fecundity decreasing
        - Found that there is a more prominent relationship between child mortality and father drinking rather than mother drinking: children with a 
          father who is a heavy drinker live less long than children with a father who is a light drinker. Children with a mother who is a heavy drinker do 
          not differ very much in life expectancy compared to children with a mother who is a light drinker. 
        - Examine this relationship more directly in a model that includes sex as a term
X Use children for whom we know both parents' drinking behaviour > is joint drinking behaviour important? > BASTA TAKES VERY VERY LONG
- Can we perform some sort of test that indicates significance in these differences between male/female and child mortality?
X Is children's drinking behaviour predicted by parents' drinking behaviour?


02/03/23

Which model should one use if the odds of each of the ordered levels of a categorical dependent variable are not equal, but there is a hierarchy in the
variable's level (e.g., from low to high)?

- Does not seem to be the case thAT childrens' drinking and parents' drinking are somehow related to one another
- If we look not at mortality, but at number of births in the last five years (given that individuals have a partner), is it linked to drinking?
- If not, what else? Combined age? Age of mother? Age of father? Combined drinking?


10/03/23

Extensions of the work

Of all children born between 2018 and 2022, how many:
- Died within the first month?
- Died within the first three months?
- Died within the first year?
- Died within the three years?
- Survived beyond the age of five?

Is there a link between the age at which a child died, its cause of death or its parents' drinking behaviour?


13/03/23

- No link between age of death and cause of death
- No link between age of death and parents' drinking


From Hill, Hurtado and Walker (2007)

"Percentages of all deaths from each cause and for each age, sex, and period category are shown in Table 4. However, differences in major causes of 
mortality across age, sex, and contact period are best compared by calculating the deaths per year at risk from each cause. This avoids invalid 
comparisons based on percentage of deaths, in which some causes may increase dramatically in relative importance simply because other causes of death 
cease to be observed. Therefore, we divided total number of deaths from each specific cause by the number at risk of death for each age group, sex, and 
time period and calculated the cause-specific death rates expressed as deaths per 1000 person years at risk for the relevant subgroups (Table 5)."

Kristin Hawkes (Hadza) 

Greaves & Kramer (2007) > https://anthrosource.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1525/aa.2007.109.4.713 

- Age specific COMPLETED fertility
- Proportional distribution of infant mortality per woman by parity for Pume mothers ages 15–25.
- The probability of an infant death is related to a mother’s exposure to giving birth. To account for the possibility that young river mothers have 
  fewer infant deaths because they have given birth to fewer children, mortality levels are tabulated with respect to parity. 
- The physiological effect of an infant death reduced the length of a birth interval by as much as ten months (Knodel 1978). 
- A decline in infant mortality can affect population growth in two confounding ways. First, because the interval to the next birth is longer when a 
  child survives, it can be negatively associated with fertility.  Second, the drop in infant mortality increases the number of children who survive to 
  reproduce in the next generation.


- SHOULD WE EXCLUDE INDIVIDUALS IN THE ALCOHOL FREQUENCY VARIABLE WHICH SAY 'ZERO' BUT ACTUALLY DRANK AT GINA'S TEST?
- Should we ask/hire someone to transcribe the full interviews with the Raute elders? 



Notes from meeting:

- Graph for females: drinking vs. non-drinking
- Graph for males: drinking vs. non-drinking

































